So in the last lecture we created like a skeleton for creating custom widgets. So we have now three functions that
we will use to display our widget in the frontend and in the backend
and also to sanitize and save our fields.
So let's start by creating our fields in the backend here.
Let's say we want to make our widget exactly like this one.
It will have a title and number of posts. And maybe also display date and maybe we can add a dropdown
that will have some options that will let you specify how you want to sort your posts by date, by comments and
so on. So let's start with the title.
Let's go back and in the form(), we will have to output some HTML,
right?
So let's close PHP and open it. And inside of here, let's add a P tag
and this P tag will wrap our input.
And let's create a LABEL for our input and inside of it we want to display a label that is the title,
right?
So let's display and escaped and translated text,
"Title".
And of course text domain.
And let's close the LABEL.
Let's add a ":" here. And let's create our input. So it will be an INPUT.
Let's give it a class, I think we used that before, class "widefat". It's a WordPress class, it will make the input
take the full width. And let's give it an ID and the ID you can't just hardcode it.
You should use a WordPress function that will generate a unique ID for this field for this widget.
So this function is actually a method in the class, in the WP_Widget class. So we can use $this to reference
the class and the method is called get_field_id(), right?
And here we can put a name for our field, so let's call it "title".
So this name is important, we will use it when we display our widget in the frontend and also
when we sanitize our fields. Well we also need a name for our input. And similar to the ID we shouldn't
also hardcode this, we should use a function. Let's copy this and instead of "id", it's called get_fie_name(). Let's add a "type="text""
and that's it for now.
Let's close it. And also we need in the label, we need to add FOR tag.
And it will for the ID.
So let's copy this and put it here.
So let's save and take a look now.
And we've our first field here.
So let's type anything here and save.
And of course nothing is saved because we haven't written anything in the update() function yet, right?
So in the update() function
we have the $new_instance and the $old_instance.
So the $new_instance object it will contain the values that you typed here after you click save. And the
$old_instance will contain the values that was written here before you change and click save, right?
So in our case for example it was an empty string and then we typed this.
So the $new_instance will contain a key called "title" that will contain the string and the $old_instance
will contain a key called "title" that will contain an empty string. And inside of this function we should somehow
use these variables and return a new object that will contain what will be saved in the database.
So if we return $new_instance here.
What we will do is we will return an object that contains the values that we typed here.
And that's exactly what we need.
So let's type something and save. And we still get an empty field here.
And that's because in the inputs we do not specify a value.
Right?
So how do we get the value.
It's by using this $instance. This $instance will contain the current values of this widget.
So why don't we try and var_dump() it?
And we have an array and it contains "title"
and then the value that we typed,
right?
If we change anything here let's type, as you can see the $instance will change.
So what we need to do now is we need to first check that we have a "title" key in this $instance.
And if so we will display it in the value otherwise we will display an empty string.
So let's write an if condition here. "if (is_set($instance[
'title']))".
So if you have a "title" key in this $instance then we want to use it, right?
So let's create a new variable called $title and assign it to title of $instance.
Otherwise we will
add an empty string to the $title variable.
Right?
And then we can use this variable as a value here.
So let's open PHP.
And don't forget we are in an HTML attribute, the "value" attribute, so we should esc_attr()
and then our $title. And we should echo this.
Let's see now.
And now we have our value. Let's save. Let's refresh and we still have it.
So that's great.
But now when we save, when we update our widget, we'll return the $new_instance.
Another say, the $new_instance will contain the thing that you typed here and the $old_instance will contain the thing
that was typed here before you save this one.
So we probably won't need the $old_instance in the update() function.
We will only need what you typed after you save it, right? And that's exactly what the $new_instance will
contain.
But we're actually returning the $new_instance, we're returning
what the user typed here without any sanitization, right?
So what we have to do is, we have to sanitize all the values inside this $new_instance.
So what you can do is, you can create a new array, let's call it $instance. And it will be an empty array. And let's return
this one instead of the $new_instance.
And then inside of this new array, we will add our values
but after sanitization.
Right?
So let's say "$instance['title']" and this will be.
Let's also check that we have this value in the $new_instance array. So is_set() and then "title" of $new_instance.
So if you have a "title" in the $new_instance we want to display it but after sanitization. So we can use
maybe sanitize_text_field().
And pass it the "title".
Otherwise we will just save an empty string.
Right?
So that's all what we need to do for the title.
So let's make sure it's still working.
And it's not.
All right, we should be array.
So let's refresh and
and it's working.
Let's type, trying type
some HTML.
And save and as you can see the sanitize_text_field() will strip it. And just to believe that we actually
did something here.
Let's go back to returning the $new_instance and let's type HTML.
As you can see it's not removed.
Right?
So that's how to sanitize your fields. Let's in the next lecture create our other fields,
this whole thing and the include date.
And also we have the number of posts.
And then after that we will display the frontend of the widget. So see you in the next lecture.